FACULTY OF NATURAL SCIENCE: COMPUTER SCIENCE

CSE2101: SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Submission One (1): Project Plan

Group Members:

Cassie Beaton USI-1031329
Dyanand Ghandatt USI-1039260
Joshua McDonald USI-1040335
Teddy Young
Vickash Singh USI- 1040248
Dominic Ross

Introduction
The project proposes a School record-Management System (SMS) designed around a centralized database
connecting public schools across Guyana. The database would allow for electronic collection, modification,
sharing and storage of school records that are typically managed through manual record keeping. These
include (but are not limited to) attendance of both students and staff, classroom records, students’ academic
records, management and organizational records, curriculum schemes etc. Moreover, public schools
regularly share records (such as weekly SBA reports and student registration for CSEC) with the Ministry
of Education (MOE) or its subsidiaries. This usually becomes increasing tedious as multiple copies of the
same documents are often recreated, updated and compiled to be shared. The SMS would allow real-time
storing and updates to such documents as well as give viewing rights to corresponding staff at the Ministry,
thereby eliminating the need to send information between parties.
Objectives
A system will be designed and developed which allows for more efficient storing and updating of school
records such as teacher and student attendance and bio data, records of work, academic achievements,
organizational records, etc. It would allow for sharing of special documents between schools and the
Ministry of Education. It would facilitate authorized sharing of common records between schools (e.g.,
teaching schemes or subject curriculums). It would employ restrictions that monitor who, and to what extent
can parties access records within the system.
Constraints
The SMS would first be developed on a small scale at a ‘pilot’ school in region four by a group of Computer
Science -professionals (hereon after referred to as “the Team”). The project shall be completed in planned
phases which are to be approved before proceeding phases are to be started. This allows for a smooth
waterfall approach in ensuring that there are no malfunctions, set-backs, or technical issues with the final
product. Because of its waterfall approach, the following expectations are put forward and may pose as
constraints if not properly fulfilled:
• The ministry of Education, the Regional Education Office (RedO), the school and its staff, and all other
stakeholders who would utilize the developed system shall be consulted by the Team regarding the
specifications of the information system, the needs of all stakeholders involved and the expected
administrative roles to be implemented within the system. Failure to completely provide such info, or
any ambiguity within its definition, could result in the need for constant changes in development which
is not ideal for the specified approach.
• A timeline will be drafted based of certain deciding factors such as:
- The estimated time it would take to convert and store sufficient school records into the test database,
and, the ready availability of these records as they become needed by the team.
- What technological resources are available to the team at the pilot school. Would they need to
transport, setup or purchase equipment?
- Whether there is an allocated space where the team can work on site or whether they would need
to either work remotely, or regularly travel to and from the school.

- Is there an existing IT department at the school and, what time, resources or information can they
provide to the team to facilitate smooth development and implementation.

Any of the above can affect or hinder the timeline of the project and would be sufficiently discussed
and explored before setting time constraints on the project development.
• Provided that a workable timeline is set, only then can budgeting consultation accurately reflect the
required funding needs of the project such as: fair compensation for the expected efforts of the Team
and selection of the most affordable partners for expenses and costs to be incurred by the project.
Budgeting discussions will also be aided by software applications specifically designed for budgeting to
prevent losses, over-expenditure or inefficient resource allocation.
The computer science experts undertaking this project shall consult relevant and valid literatures, dealing
with the designing of similar information systems for education sectors of other countries to have an ideal
approach and perhaps consider configurating and integrating possible recommendations. This research shall
also be vital in deciding which methodology for designing the information system is the best.
Project Organization
Development of the SMS would require a team of eight and at least two liaisons; one from the local Region
Education Office (RedO), and one form central Ministry. The liaisons would facilitate communication
between the Team and MOE, and relay information progress reports and the particulars required to grant
them access to the system.
The initial timeline planning shall be done using a software application, which allows the tracking of
deadlines, upcoming projects, time duration and milestones achieved within the allocated time taken to
complete the project.
The team of computer science experts responsible for the actualization of the project shall be divided into
subgroups responsible for specific aspects of organization as described below:

o Planning and Scheduling Committee- creating realistic plans and schedule for the project
completion in a timely manner
o Software Design committee- designing a working simple, user-friendly software system
with the necessary functionalities as specified for the information system
o Research committee- researching the latest literature and inventions done similar to the
project being undertaken and emulating positive recommendations and effective methods
for completing the project
o Public relations and Project Promotion team – consulting with stakeholders, promoting the
importance of the information system, offering guidance on its purpose and usage
o Budgeting and Financing Team – sourcing funds and brainstorming the best methods of
properly managing the said funds in expending for the project’s costs. o Project
management team – to manage all other committees listed above and ensuring that the
project is completing milestones as specified by the schedule.

Risk Analysis
Possible Project Risks:
1. A possible malfunction/bug in software storing thousands of unique personalized records and
linking them back to specific users of the system, could result in loss or corruption of sensitive
information
2. Uncontrollable events such as electrical outages, electrical accidents, fire etc. can render the system
inaccessible for a period of time which would be a great inconvenience
3. Negligence on behalf of the system users (for e.g., a teacher leaving their account logged in on a
public device) can result in unauthorized access to organizational records, malicious tampering,
distribution or destruction of said records etc.
4. One of the highlights of the system is to make it possible for class masters/mistresses and
administrators to automatically generated their respective reports at the end of the semester without
having to wait on subject teachers’ calculations. However, if a subject teacher does not enter a grade
for a student at all into the system, the system would still be on hold, or produce inaccurate
information in the generated reports.
5. Record keeping in schools across Guyana have been paper based for years. Even with computers
and other technology present within these very organizations, the extent to which they are utilized
is very limited and mostly due to lack of knowledge about the possibilities that exist, or
unwillingness to accept change. Teachers (and especially the older generation of teachers) are set
in their ways and do not want to ‘re-learn’ how to operate and utilize modern technology. Because
of this, the software may be rejected by a large portion of teachers who may find it difficult to
navigate the technology.
6. Operational mishaps and low performance within teams can result in failing to meet deadlines, and
lead to the team producing a rushed or mediocre product. This would then improve the probability
of the stated risks. E.g., a rushed system with poor integrity features or one that lacked rigorous
testing, is more susceptible to security breaches, poor functionality, data loss/corruption etc.
And contingency plans are in place should such issues arise

Risk reduction Strategies
1. Software will go through rigorous testing and functional analysis by both Team members as well
as intended users before deployment. The software will also be open source to allow the community
of hackers to find and fix weak points within the system. Continued system updates will also be
offered throughout the lifetime of the software to unsure that the system is always secure against
arising threats.
2. While we can prevent the software threats, one cannot foresee nor control threats such as electrical
mishaps or natural disasters. The system will however prepare for such events by creating regular
(and multiple) backups and recovery points. This will be done automatically by computers that will
be given access to the SMS for this very purpose. These backups and recovery files will be
fragmented, encrypted and distributed to ensure maximum security and that damage to a backup

system would not affect the backed-up files. The process will be executed automatically as a
background process not requiring human intervention.
3. To address the issue of negligence, the system would employ strict security mechanisms and access
control features that cater for human error. For example, users will be automatically logged out of
the system after 3-5 minutes of inactivity, once the application is closed, there is a power outage
etc. It would not allow a user to log in from more than one device at a time and would prompt users
if they are currently logged in on some other device (with the option to launch a report if they did
not initiate the login). These and other features would be employed to reduce the risks associated
with human error.
4. The system will require teachers to enter grades at regular intervals throughout the semester
(determined by the schedule of activities of each term. i.e., dates for mid-term exams, assignment
deadlines etc.). The system would also flag a teacher who fails to meet these deadlines to encourage
diligence in data entry. Should a teacher still fail to enter a grade for one or more assessments by
the deadline set for submissions from subject teachers, the system would automatically adjust a
student’s possible score to reflect a correct grade. (An example of this can be found in the appendix
and the end of this document)
5. The system will be released in sections and be tested by its users not only for functionality but
usability. It will cater to the needs and critique of the teachers that will be using it to make it as
user-friendly as possible. Further, demo videos and an illustrative instructional pdf will be sent to
new users’ email upon first registration into the SMS. The interface will also have a closable side
panel that outlines the step by step to the performing various tasks within the system.1
6. Strict action plans will be drafted and enforced to ensure equitable work distribution and workable
deadlines. Weekly checklists will be used to ensure the project is developing at a desired pace. The
Team will engage in regular meetings that address challenges, short comings and possible setbacks,
before they happen and prepare contingency plans for scenarios where uncontrollable
circumstances may arise (such as a team member falling ill). The Team will also

1 As a visual aid, think about the task pane option that opens when you use the Microsoft word mail merge wizard. A similar pane will be optionable
(can be opened or closed by the user) to guide novel users through the steps of certain transactions within the SMS)

Hardware and Software Requirements
Hardware Requirements: For the immediate system implementation, no special hardware requirements are
foreseen. The team would require systems running on a modern OS with at least 8GB RAM capacity to
facilitate programming and networking software to be utilized. For future developments, the system will
be expanded to allow for staff and students to record arrival at school through a scan-in system. This future
feature would eventually require hardware that scans ID cards of staff and students. This is however not an
immediate hardware requirement of the pilot project.
Supporting Software systems required: The system is to be developed using the Python programming
language with Tkinter as the front-end interface. It will utilize a standard relational database management
software and language such as MySQL to meet the database challenges of the project. The networking
aspect will integrate a cross-platform server software such as XAMPP or WAMPP that would help the team
developers to create and test the program and database on a PHP webserver. Since the database is intended
to be integrated and remotely accessed, these programs would help developers to see practical examples of
how the developed system would function with server specifications and access protocols.


Work Breakdown
Milestone Deliverable Intended Outcome
Phase One: A
conceptual design is
created

Database and System design:
after completion of the
project specification
document, the team will
provide a detailed design
model of the system,

including ER diagrams, Use-
Case diagrams etc., that

outline the operational
components and process of
the SMS.

The design should give stakeholders a
conceptual understanding of how the
system would look, how the information
would be accessed and shared, as well as
outline the solutions to the requirements
proposed by each involved party. This

would then allow stakeholders to re-
define any existing needs (or highlight

any new requirements of the system) that
would affect the design model before the
Team moves forward.

Phase two: An electronic
database is created

Existing manual records form
the school will be converted
into a softcopy database. The
database will allow for
electronic access, addition
and modification of records
in the database.

The electronic database is intended to
show the ease with which record
keeping/sharing can be done and solidify
the efficiency and need for the project. It
would also give the school an opportunity
to see the relation between entities within
the system and highlight where there may
be a need to form or modify existing
relationships, add files to the database etc.

Phase three: Sever
development and remote
access

The database will be hosted
on a server and the outlined
software systems will be
integrated to allow
MOE and RedO to remotely
access the database.

Stakeholders can view in actuality, the
functioning system and how it allows
remote access and efficient information
distribution.

Phase four:
Implementation of frontend
interface

The software interface of the
system is developed using
Python with Tkinter. The
software will allocate IDs to
administrative staff and
teachers of the school

Stakeholders would now be able to access
the database by simply logging onto the
developed interface with test credentials.

as well as members of the
MOE and RedO. It will
employ access control
restrictions that monitors and
controls the extent of access
given to persons using the
system.

Phase five: System Testing
Deploy and Testing (Dummy)

After internal testing by the
Team, the SMS system is
implemented unto PCs at the
pilot school and RedO. Staff
members are asked to utilize
the system with test data and
a vigorous workload over a
period of one week.

The Team gets a view of the system in the
real-world scenario for which It was
developed. They can then assess its
effectiveness, functionality, acceptability,
ease of use etc. and pinpoint any
oversights or room for improvement.

Phase six: Full
Deployment

The complete SMS is
deployed on systems at the
school, RedO and MOE.

A satisfactory product is delivered and
accepted.

Maintenance and expansion - Regular updates to the system will be
released to cater for newly arising security
threats. This requires a team of
programmers that will maintain the
system. Additionally, as stakeholders see
the efficiency of the SMS, it is expected
that the team would be re-contracted for
expansion of the system to secondary
schools across Guyana. It is also expected
that discussions begin for further
development of the project such as having
an electronic scan-in system to record
attendance of student and staff. Or a
smart-selection system that would
automatically identify students for
extracurricular activities (e.g., literature
and drama competitions, school debates
etc.) through factors such as age, the
extracurricular activities taken by the
student, their grades in particular subject
area, etc.


Project Schedule & Gantt Chart
Milestone Team Responsible Expected Time Period
Phase 1 Planning, Public Relations, Project

management, research

1/Nov/2022 – 30/Nov/2022

Phase 2 Project management,

design, research

Software 1/Dec/2022 – 30/Jan/2023

Phase 3 Project management,

design, research

Software 01/Feb/2023 –
20/Mar/2023

Phase 4 Project management,

design, research

Software 01/Apr/2023-30/Jul/2023

Phase 5 Project management,

design, research

Software 01/Aug/2023-08/Aug/2023

Phase 6 Research, Project management,

Software design

10/Aug/2023 - 30/Aug/2023


BREAKDOWN OF CONTRIBUTIONS
Introduction Teddy Young
Objectives Vickash Singh
Project Organization Dyanand Ghandatt
Constraints, Risk Analysis, Hardware and
Software Requirements, Work Breakdown, Project
Schedule & Gantt chart

Cassie Beaton

Corrections/Modifications to submission 1 Cassie Beaton

APPENDIX
Example of system adjustment in calculations to cater for a teacher who fails to enter a grade:
If a student does 5 subjects, therefore their percentage is calculated as:
total marks achieved for all subjects
total possible marks × 100
1
And where the total possible marks would be 500 (100 for each subject).
Now let us suppose that a subject teacher fails to enter a grade for this student by the given deadline, the
system would then calculate that student’s percentage as:

total marks achieved for all subjects
400 × 100
1

To cater for the missing grade and to accurately reflect the student’s performance. Such an adjustment can
be done at the database level. The students’ total marks achieved can be determined by a calculated field
that sums all values entered in each of the subject-grade columns. The total possible marks can be done
using a count function that counts only grade columns that are not null (so it will exclude subject with
missing grades) and multiply the count result by 100. The percentage calculation would therefore not be
affected by a missing grade but instead utilize only those tasks for which the student did receive a grade, to
determine their performance report. This concept will be applied for both percentages received in individual
subjects as well as in the over class.
It is important to note that this adjustment will only be made if the student did not receive a grade and not
if a zero grade was assigned. Therefore, the system shall be configured to enforce a difference between a
zero and a NULL value in its calculations.
