Organization: The Guyana Police Force


Project Idea: A Management Information System that will replace the current paper-based
system used by the Criminal Records Office to issue Certificates of Character.
The Guyana Police Force is a crime-fighting organization that deals with numerous aspects of
security to ensure social trust and create a safe environment for the citizens of Guyana. The
Criminal Records Office (CRO) accepts and processes all requests for the Certificate of
Character, commonly known as the Police Clearance or a Good Conduct Certificate. The
Certificate of Character facilitates travel and job employment requirements after conducting
background checks, stating whether or not the applicant has a criminal record of previous
convictions in Guyana.


Problem Overview
The applying, processing and issuing of a Certificate of Character in its current state, is
inefficient, time-consuming and paper-based. The following are the key issues identified that the
organization wants to address by using technology:

1. Applicants are required to visit the Criminal Records Office (CRO) when submitting their
application and retrieving a certificate, this often results in long lines, waiting times and people
frustrated with the process.

2. Issuing a Certificate of Character involves the department cross-checking an applicant's
criminal history; this is done by having an officer manually review records in a paper logbook.
This part of the process is time-consuming, prone to human error and sometimes not correct.

3. As the records are paper based, it’s a time-consuming effort to generate useful reports
from the data captured to aid with decision-making, additionally, there is a constant risk of
records being misplaced and lost should an incident such as a fire occur.


The proposed digital Management Information System aims to address the issues identified
above as follows:

1. Make the process convenient and accessible for persons, by eliminating the existing need
for the applicant to visit the Criminal Records Office (CRO) when submitting their application
and retrieving a certificate.

2. Significantly reduce the time it takes to cross-check the criminal records of an applicant. To
achieve this all documentation would be stored and processed digitally from the application stage
to the output of the Certificate of Character. The information system will be able to automatically
determine if an applicant has a criminal record.

3. The Information System will allow the generation of reports that can be used in the
decision-making processes.


Relationship to Organization:
A member of the group is employed with the Guyana Police Force and the majority of the group
members are familiar with the process of applying for and obtaining a Certificate of Character.
As a group, we are interested in improving the system for the officers issuing the certificate and
the applicants.
