Submission 1: Project Plan
Introduction
The project proposes a School Management System (SMS) designed around a centralized
database connecting public schools across Guyana. The database will allow for electronic
collection, modification, sharing and storage of school records that are typically managed
through manual record keeping. These include (but are not limited to) attendance of both
students and staff, classroom records, students’ academic records, management and
organizational records, curriculum schemes etc. Moreover, public schools regularly share
records (such as weekly SBA reports and student registration for CSEC) with the Ministry of
Education (MOE) or its subsidiaries. This usually becomes increasing tedious as multiple copies
of the same documents are often recreated, updated and compiled to be shared. The SMS
would allow real-time storing and updates to such documents as well as give viewing rights to
corresponding staff at the Ministry, thereby eliminating the need to send information between
parties.
Objectives
A system will be designed and developed which allows for more efficient storing and updating of
school records such as teacher and student attendance and bio data, records of work,
academic achievements, organizational records, etc. It would allow for sharing of special
documents between schools and the Ministry of Education. It would facilitate authorized sharing
of common records between schools (e.g., teaching schemes or subject curriculums). It would
employ restrictions that monitor who, and to what extent can parties access records within the
system.
Constraints
The SMS would first be developed on a small scale at a ‘pilot’ school in region four by a group
of Computer Science -professionals (hereon after referred to as the Team). The project shall be
completed in planned phases which are to be approved before proceeding phases are to be
started. This allows for a smooth waterfall approach in ensuring that there are no malfunctions,
set-backs, or technical issues with the final product. Because of its waterfall approach, the
following expectations are put forward and may pose as constraints if not properly fulfilled:
● The Ministry of Education, the Regional Education Office (RedO), the school and its staff,
and all other stakeholders who would utilize the developed system shall be consulted by the
Team regarding the specifications of the information system, the needs of all stakeholders
involved and the expected administrative roles to be implemented within the system. Failure
to completely provide such info, or any ambiguity within its definition, could result in the
need for constant changes in development which is not ideal for the specified approach.

● A timeline will drafted based of certain deciding factors such as:

- The estimated time it would take to convert and store sufficient school records into the
test database, and, the ready availability of these records as they become needed by the
team.
- What technological resources are available to the team at the pilot school. Would they
need to transport, setup or purchase equipment?
- Whether there is an allocated space where the team can work on site or whether they
would need to either work remotely, or regularly travel to and from the school.
- Is there an existing IT department at the school and, what time, resources or information
can they provide to the team to facilitate smooth development and implementation.

Any of the above can affect or hinder the timeline of the project and would be sufficiently
discussed and explored before setting time constraints on the project development.
● Provided that a workable timeline is set, only then can budgeting consultation accurately
reflect the required funding needs of the project such as: fair compensation for the expected
efforts of the Team selection of the most affordable partners for expenses and costs to be
incurred by the project. Budgeting discussions will also be aided by software applications
specifically designed for budgeting to prevent losses, over-expenditure or inefficient resource
allocation.

The computer science experts undertaking this project shall consult relevant and valid
literatures, dealing with the designing of similar information systems for education sectors of
other countries to have an ideal approach and perhaps consider configuration and integrating
possible recommendations. This research shall also be vital in deciding which methodology for
designing the information system is the best.
Project Organization
Development of the SMS would require a team of eight and at least two liaisons; one from the
local Region Education Office (RedO), and one form central Ministry. The liaisons would
facilitate communication between the Team and MOE, and relay information progress reports
and the particulars required to grant them access to the system.
The initial timeline planning shall be done using a software application, which allows the tracking
of deadlines, upcoming projects, time duration and milestones achieved within the allocated
time taken to complete the project.
The team of computer science experts responsible for the actualization of the project shall be
divided into subgroups responsible for specific aspects of organization as described below:
o Planning and Scheduling Committee- creating realistic plans and schedule for
the project completion in a timely manner
o Software Design committee- designing a working simple, user-friendly software
system with the necessary functionalities as specified for the information system

o Research committee- researching the latest literature and inventions done similar
to the project being undertaken and emulating positive recommendations and
effective methods for completing the project
o Public relations and Project Promotion team – consulting with stakeholders,
promoting the importance of the information system, offering guidance on its
purpose and usage
o Budgeting and Financing Team – sourcing funds and brainstorming the best
methods of properly managing the said funds in expending for the project’s costs.
o Project management team – to manage all other committees listed above and
ensuring that the project is completing milestones as specified by the schedule.

Risk Analysis
Possible Project Risks:
1. A possible malfunction in software storing thousands of unique personalized records and
linking them back to a specific student or teacher’s ID
2. A high cost/ budget in funding for the hardware as well as for the designing and of the
information system and unexpected financial loss due to possible loss or unavailable
suppliers
3. Damage to property due to fire, electrical outages, electrical accidents, server damages,
4. The risk of malware, cybersecurity breaches affecting the system’s software, data
integrity compromise to system from hackers
5. Operational mishaps and low performance within teams
Risk reduction Strategies
1. Preparing weekly Checklists and working towards completing items on the list
2. Assumption Risk analysis- anticipating possible risks occurring and facilitating essential
solutions for them in a proactive manner
3. Regular team meetings – to discuss challenges, short comings, motivating team
members, discussing setbacks, and celebrating milestones
4. Allocated time for review and maintenance of systems
5. Ensuring regular checkups and back up systems are in place for computer systems, and
electrical power sources for work pace and establishing and monitoring software/
database securities for any software threats and cybersecurity issues.
Hardware and software resource requirements - This specifies the hardware and support
software required to carry out the development.
Hardware and Software Requirements
Hardware Requirements:
Supporting Software systems required:

Work Breakdown- Work breakdown - This sets out the breakdown of the project into activities
and identifies the milestones and deliverables associated with each activity. Milestones are key
stages in the project where progress can be assessed; deliverables are work products that are
delivered to the customer.

Project Schedule
Project schedule - This shows the dependencies between activities, the estimated time required
to reach each milestone, and the allocation of people to activities. You are required to present
the schedule using a Gantt chart.
